---
layout: post
title: A Critical Reflection
description: How I learned to apply Contemporary Media Literacy to my life
image: assets/images/reflection.png
banner: assets/images/reflection-banner.png
---

<p>When I began this class, I did not know what to expect. Was this going to be a class that will teach us how to use social media? Would our assignments be to create a “brand” on Instagram? See how much influence we could generate on Twitter? While those might be an individual’s desired outcomes, Contemporary Media Literacy is much more. Traditional literacy is commonly understood to mean being able to read and write the spoken word. Can a person read a newspaper or a book? Can they write a paper for school, fill out a job application or compose a resume? In the end, literacy is about communication.</p>
<p>However, the world has changed. There are many ways the world can communicate with us; and many ways we can communicate with the world. To better describe the changes, the term Contemporary Media Literacy was coined. Contemporary Media is the use of images, sound, and the physical and virtual environment to communicate. In order to be literate now, a person must be able to create, access, and analyze communication through a variety of media. Contemporary media literacy extends traditional media practices to the role of media in society as well as the skills needed to function in that society. At my age, interactions with much of the forms of contemporary media are limited. I do not engage much in social media. I do not blog. I have an interest in using forms of contemporary media to help with my job. I am a data scientist, and I have to communicate my findings in a variety of ways. Most audiences are not interested in the math or highly technical nature of the analysis. They want the story.</p>
<p>
Communicating through storytelling is a skill I am at which I am comfortable. As I discussed in my term paper, the people who are responsible for working with data in the government need to focus on the story that is contained in the data and less about the data itself. As I continue to develop these skills, I am comfortable with multimodal literacies involving web pages and PowerPoint presentations. I am familiar with the technologies and can focus more attention on the actual literacy aspects such as visual aspects and the written or linguistic components of literacy through these genres. Additionally, I feel that I can adjust my message to the audience. I can communicate with those well versed in the field, management, and customers and lay people by adjusting the tone and level of content in the communication. Conversely, I also feel that I need to further improve my communication in the same areas – visual and linguistic. Much of my work is in these genres, and they are constantly evolving. Therefore, I feel the need to continue perfecting my techniques in these areas. There are other forms of contemporary media literacy that might be important to others, but they are not prevalent in my life and thus, not as important.</p>
<p>
What is prevalent in my daily life is the social and political environment where communication takes place. In this environment, I can not escape the social and political environment. In a bureaucratic organization, a person needs to very aware of who their intended audience is before beginning to craft the communication. Without an understanding of the audience, We risk confusion and even outright disagreement when most commonly the intention is always to inform, empower and build consensus. Contemporary media literacy focuses equally on the message as well as the receiver of the message, Stronger agreement, and better communication occur when the audience and their rationale is considered. In Mills’ essay on contemporary media literacy, she illustrates when the method of instruction was adjusted to enable the aboriginal students better to participate, the educational outcomes were improved for all the students. (Mills, 2015) This example shows how taking an approach involving contemporary media literacy improves outcomes. By applying the same principals in my work life, I can achieve more for myself and my audience. In an academic setting such as the BIPS program here at UNCG, applying these same techniques will allow me to better communicate for assignments. Going forward, I will certainly be applying contemporary media literacies when applicable.</p>
<p>
A large portion of this course revolves around spoken and written communication. These are still crucial aspects of literacy and cannot be abandoned. When given an assignment that requires a spoken presentation I begin by trying to understand the constraints of the audience and purpose. Once the audience and purpose are understood, the actual process of crafting the speech can begin. I will begin by writing in a stream of consciousness to get my thoughts on paper (or the screen). I can then begin the process of narrowing and clarifying the message and crafting more coherent sentences and transitions. At this time, my opening statement and closing begin to take form. Once I am content, I will begin to practice the speech out loud. This practice helps to refine the speech further and check it for length.
I take a similar approach to my writing style. Much of what I write is done in a stream of consciousness. I seldom take the time to write a more formal outline before beginning. Usually, I will begin with the content and not in the introduction. I find this helps to frame the introduction and conclusion better. Given the lackluster grade I received for the term paper in this class, this methodology could include some improvement. Another problem I have is determining the level of content and messaging for the audience. Much of the work I do, both speaking and writing, is focused on a select group of co-workers or colleagues that have a similar basis of understanding. Identifying the audience was something which I struggled with on the paper for this class. If I had written it for the audience of professionals I normally work with, the tone and content would have been different. While this method usually works well professionally, it does not work well in an academic setting. I cannot assume that the audience of the speech or paper will have the necessary background in the professional field and thus have difficulty understanding the relationship between the course material and how it relates to the subject. In a professional setting I can expect the audience to understand the field of study, but not how it relates to the course material. The change of level of detail and audience is not the only difference between academic and professional writing. Additionally, the vernacular and metalanguage of the dialog are changed. Experts in the field of Open Data would have more understanding of the base material, and density of the language would be different. Another significant change is in the constraints of time and space. In a professional situation, it is less likely that a hard limit of time or paper length would be enforced. In the educational setting, there is usually a limit on paper or speech length applied. I feel that this limit is imposed due to the limitation of the grader’s and reviewer’s time and not on the material itself. Professionally, such an artificial constraint is applied.</p>
<p>
This class parts from the traditional forms of communication, speech, and writing.  This class also requires a contemporary approach to information delivery in the form of a website. This form of literacy requires to transpose mediums while maintaining the message and is called transmediation. On the website I built for this class, there were several instances where the change in medium required reformatting and re-encoding the message. One such instance was the genre article on visual imagery. For the assignment that served as a basis for that part of the website, I could assume the audience (reviewer and grader) had the information to place the topic into context. When displaying this on the website, I needed to explicitly add the intent and framing of the assignment, since I could not expect the audience to understand the material without this “preamble.” In another part of the website, I rearranged the essay to consider the way information is processed in the multimodal model like a website. I made sure to consider negative space, font, and enforce more clearly the transition of parts of the essay through section headings. For an academic paper delivered classically, the formatting is limited to double-spaced times new roman font. I made these decisions because of the need to transition existing material which as originally delivered in a traditional, academic situation to a new, contemporary medium such as the web.</p>
<p>
While the need to provide the alteration of the delivery of the message was very clear, I also had to perform some of the same transmediation for the final presentation delivered as a speech. For this assignment, I altered the content of the term paper to be better framed for a person listening and less for not for a person reading the material. Editing the speech involved paring down the details, keeping the information at a higher level. I also used visual aids to help enforce crucial information and provide clear transitions. This type of work, building websites and preparing and giving presentations, to tell a story is generally enjoyable. Much of the enjoyment comes from envisioning how the story should unfold and then finding ways to make that vision a reality. With websites, that can involve architecting the site or finding ways to make the material clear and better presented. With presentations, it involves conveying information without being overwhelming and also entertaining. Both require getting the audience's attention and uses the medium to retain it. With speeches and presentation, we focus on visuals and vocal variety to engage the audience. With web presentations, the focus is on quickly grabbing attention and allowing the audience to absorb the material in a non-linear fashion. </P>
<p>
Being able to engage an audience is difficult and it very difficult to predict an audience. The audience will probably not focus on the exact parts of the presentation that had been originally planned. For this reason, given more time; I would have done some audience testing to get feedback and refine the website and presentation. The accelerated timeline of this class makes feedback as difficult at best. In my professional life, I do have the luxury of time to employ these feedback mechanisms to iterate and improve the presentation. While I will not likely use this material as presented professionally, the techniques and more importantly the thought process and considerations of audience, medium, and message will have a place in my work going forward. Previously, I made broad assumptions regarding my audience. If they were listening, then they thought like me. I now know that not to be the case. I must alter the frame my communications if the level of literacy in the subject of my audience does not match my own. I did understand much of the considerations of space and visual processing around visual images through other studies, but this class allowed me to re-examine them through a different lens and learn more. </p>
<p>
In many ways, I am a very atypical student. I am not the traditional age and status of most students, nor am I looking for a career transition. The goal of my education and the BIPS program is for personal fulfillment and enrichment. I have a successful career and already hold engineering, analytics, and marketing degrees. I enjoy innovation and learning. When I found the BIPS program at UNCG, I knew this was something I wanted to try. I feel that any new skill learned can be applied outside the field in which was learned when well understood and thoughtfully considered. Much of contemporary media literacy involves understanding your audience and medium as well as the subject. In this way, studying this subject will enable me to become more effective in my communication, ultimately resulting in more success. Consideration of the audience is the most important aspect of this class that I will take away from this class. Much of my previous education lacked an audience focus, such as engineering and statistics. In these fields, truth (or estimates and tolerances in much of engineering) are quite absolute and not subject to the audience and their considerations. Through this course and the others, I have taken I have had to relearn and take into consideration my audience. There is not much more I would change. </p>
<p>With an online program like BIPS program, class interaction is sometimes difficult. I have been quite lucky in my classes to have engaged students with whom to interact. These interactions do enhance the class. The other students have perspectives and experiences different than my own. When they share in the forum, it often helps make the material clearer. In particular, I had trouble understanding some of the early material. Other students entries on the discussion forum help quite a bit. Overall, I think this class was helpful. It taught skills I did not have previously and reinforced skills I did have. Thanks.</p>
 
Works Cited

Mills, K. A. (2015). Literacy Theories for the Digital Age: Social, Critical, Multimodal, Spatial, Material and Sensory Lenses. Bristol, Buffalo, Toronto: Multilingual Matters.
